Professor T. F. Hewer: Dr. Farrant will now give us the post-mortem findings-
Dr. P. C. Farrant: This man was extremely well developed and muscular. [...]

So here was a rather large and flabby brain. At this point, I asked Dr. Bishton's adN
as to whether I should cut it or not. Dr. Bishton took one look at the brain and sa}
that I should make one cut?it might be a 3rd ventricle cyst: it was! There
colloid cyst of the 3rd ventricle which had been compressing the foramina of Mo
laterally causing dilation of both lateral ventricles and hydrocephalus. It arose y ^
a wide but rather tenuous attachment from the roof of the 3rd ventricle: histologic^
this cyst is filled with colloidal material which before fixation was translucent, an i
the colloid material there are scattered groups of inflammatory cells, leucocytes an
few macrophages. The inner lining has a single layer of cuboidal epithelium, in P*
ciliated. Externally the cyst is lined by rather flattened cells which may be a den
layer or may be due to stretching.
These cysts have been variously described as arising from the choroid plexus>
ependyma or the paraphysis. They only occur in the 3rd ventricle and this fact ina? .
their derivation from choroid plexus and ependyma less likely. On the other n [
choroid plexus during development does grow down from this position to the & . ^
and the 3rd ventricles. As to the theory that they come from the paraphysis, this j
structure found in certain lower vertebrates?frogs, some fishes and prominen /y
believe, in the sturgeon. It is an out-pouching from the front of the 3rd ventricle ^ ?
by a derivative of ependyma. In man it is a transient structure which is present ^
while the embryo is from 19-32 mm. in length. Histology of this particular cyst^t
not definitely decide the matter but ciliated epithelium is recognizable and the
likely origin is from the paraphysis. eji'
There was another incidental finding: the spleen, thymus and left tonsil we ^
larged and I thought it possible that we might be dealing with a case of
lymphoid hyperplasia. The lymph nodes, however, were not enlarged. The en J
ment of the spleen was due entirely to gross acute congestion. The thymus s ^ jts
reactive hyperplasia and was, in addition, fatty: it is possible that this could ^
normal state in some young healthy adults?this man was 29. The tonsillar en
ment was due to the presence of several hard accretions in its crypts. f0(t'
