[PMC FULL TEXT (PMC3871710) - paragraphs mentioning the paraphysis, copied verbatim; italic species names are stripped in the PMC text as retrieved]

RESULTS, Early embryonic stages (34-40):
The first Pax7 cells were detected by stage 34 (about 44 h postfertilization) just after the animals exhibit the first spontaneous movements. The cells located most rostrally were found in the basal plate of the rostral portion of the diencephalic vesicle, in the prospective p3 (Figure). Caudally, lightly stained cells occupied the vz of the alar part of p1 (Figures), whereas intensely labeled cells were present in the mz (Figure) and in the subcommissural organ (ScO), a roof plate derivative in p1 (Figures). In addition, weak staining was detected in dorsal mesencephalic vesicle (Figures) and in the alar plate of the rostral hindbrain. Of note, in these early stages that were processed in toto, weak immunoreactivity was observed in the membranous structures between the telencephalic hemispheres that contain the paraphysis, distinct from the choroid plexus. However, the continuity of this expression in subsequent developmental stages could not be assessed in our material (see Discussion).

DISCUSSION (forebrain):
Following the modified prosomeric model, the forebrain comprises the topologically rostral secondary prosencephalon and the caudal diencephalon. The secondary prosencephalon is subdivided into the telencephalon and the hypothalamus (Puelles and Rubenstein,). In agreement with all previous reports in different vertebrates, Pax7 expression in the telencephalon was not observed inat any stage of development. However, intense Pax7 expression in the paraphysis of the urodele amphibianhas been reported, representing from the embryonic stages a small invagination of the telencephalic roof plate, and the expression was maintained through development (Joven et al.,). Similar results were not consistently obtained in, most likely due to the fact that the membranous formations of the choroid plexus and the adhered paraphysis were removed when the brains were dissected out. Interestingly Pax7 expression was described in the paraphysis during development in the chick (Nomura et al.,). The paraphysis was described within the telencephalon because it is located rostral to the velum transversum, which classically marks its dorsal limit with the diencephalon (Warren,), and according to its development it was considered a posterior telencephalic organ adjacent to the choroid plexus of the third ventricle (Kappers,). Therefore, the only telencephalic structure that might express Pax7, at least in some vertebrates, would be the paraphysis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS, Animals and tissue processing:
For the present study embryos and larvae ofwere used. They were staged according to Nieuwkoop and Faber () and sorted into embryonic (35-45), premetamorphic (46-52), prometamorphic (53-59), and metamorphic (60-65) stages (see Table).

[PUBMED ABSTRACT, PMID 24399938 (does not name the paraphysis)]
Pax7 is a member of the highly conserved Pax gene family that is expressed in restricted zones of the central nervous system (CNS) during development, being involved in early brain regionalization and the maintenance of the regional identity. Using sensitive immunohistochemical techniques we have analyzed the spatiotemporal pattern of Pax7 expression in the brain of the anuran amphibian Xenopus laevis, during development. Pax7 expression was first detected in early embryos in the basal plate of prosomere 3, roof and alar plates of prosomere 1 and mesencephalon, and the alar plate of rhombomere 1.
