[PubMed abstract, PMID 24250183]
Intracranial dermoid cyst and colloid cysts of the third ventricle are rare benign congenital lesions of early adulthood. Both lesions are thought to be congenital in origin however association is rare. Only one case of this association has been reported. We report a 22-year-old male with suprasellar dermoid cyst and colloid cyst of the third ventricle presenting simultaneously. Embryogenesis of this association has been discussed.

[PMC3821436 full text, Discussion - paragraph 3]
Congenital origin of these cysts is accepted universally; however, cell of origin is highly debated.[] Initial reports suggested their neuroepithelial origin as the derivatives of paraphysis or ventricular ependyma and these were further supported later by other studies.[] However, Mackenzie[] in 1991 suggested the endodermal derivation of these cysts on the basis of ultrastructural features which was supported by other authors.[] Until recently endodermal derivation of these cysts enjoyed the favor when Nagaraju.,[] in 2010 reignited the debate by claiming colloid cysts as paraphysis remnants in human.

[PMC3821436 full text, Discussion - paragraph 4]
Colloid cysts are associated with various developmental malformations like corpus callosal agenesis, anterior cranial fossa encephalocels, cavum veli interpositi, and multiple neuroepithelial cysts and aqueductal stenosis.[] These malformations represent a spectrum of neural tube closure defects and associated anomalies. Although isolated sporadic form of colloid cyst is most common occurrence, these associations suggest disordered embryogenesis as a possible mechanism in their formation. Colloid cyst has also been reported to be associated with frontal epidermoid cyst.[] Cheng.,[] in 1999 reported a case of nasal dermoid sinus cyst associated with colloid cyst of third ventricle and proposed a fascinating theory of “anterior neuropore corridor defects” to explain the spectrum of these associated rare midline lesions. According to this theory, defective closure of situs neuroporicus promotes the neuroepithelium adjacent to commissural plate derivatives to form a vacuolated paraphysis growing slowly as colloid cyst of the third ventricle. Similar derivation from paraphysial remnants was also reported by Nagaraju., in 2010 supporting Cheng's hypothesis.[] Although lack of substantial evidence remained main drawback of this theory, disordered embryogenesis appears to be the most plausible explanation in our case rather than mere coincidence.
