[PubMed abstract, PMID 25147506]
Many of the genes involved in brain patterning during development are highly conserved in vertebrates and similarities in their expression patterns help to recognize homologous cell types or brain regions. Among these genes, Pax6 and Pax7 are expressed in regionally restricted patterns in the brain and are essential for its development. In the present immunohistochemical study we analyzed the distribution of Pax6 and Pax7 cells in the brain of six representative species of tetrapods and lungfishes, the closest living relatives of tetrapods, at several developmental stages. The distribution patterns of these transcription factors were largely comparable across species. In all species only Pax6 was expressed in the telencephalon, including the olfactory bulbs, septum, striatum, and amygdaloid complex. In the diencephalon, Pax6 and Pax7 were distinct in the alar and basal parts, mainly in prosomeres 1 and 3. Pax7 specifically labeled cells in the optic tectum (superior colliculus) and Pax6, but not Pax7, cells were found in the tegmentum. Pax6 was found in most granule cells of the cerebellum and Pax7 labeling was detected in cells of the ventricular zone of the rostral alar plate and in migrated cells in the basal plate, including the griseum centrale and the interpeduncular nucleus. Caudally, Pax6 cells formed a column, whereas the ventricular zone of the alar plate expressed Pax7. Since the observed Pax6 and Pax7 expression patterns are largely conserved they can be used to identify subdivisions in the brain across vertebrates that are not clearly discernible with classical techniques.

[PMC4123791 full text, Materials and Methods - Animals and tissue processing]
For the present study adult, juvenile, and developing specimens were used. Brains analyzed were of mice (; developmental stages included embryonic and postnatal stages), chickens (, classified according to; 8–11 days or stages HH33–HH37 were used), turtles (, prehatching; 1–2 weeks prehatching and less than 5 cm long specimens were used), frogs (, embryonic and larval stages were used, classified according to), newts (, embryonic and larval stages were used, classified according to), and lungfish (; developmental staging according to; stages 45–46 were used). All animals were treated according to the regulations and laws of the European Union (2010/63/UE) and Spain (Royal Decrees 53/2013) for care and handling of animals in research and after approval from the Complutense University to conduct the experiments described. The lungfish material was sent fixed by Dr. Jean M. P. Joss (Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia) and we have conducted the staining in Madrid. For all the other species, at appropriate times, animals were deeply anesthetized and fixed by immersion or perfusion in cold 4% paraformaldehyde in a 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB, pH 7.4). The brains were removed and kept in the same fixative for 2–3 h. Subsequently, they were immersed in a solution of 30% sucrose in PB for 4–6 h at 4°C until they sank, embedded in a solution of 20% gelatin with 30% sucrose in PB, and stored for 6 h in a 10% formaldehyde solution at 4°C. The brains were cut on a freezing microtome at 20–30 μm in the transverse, horizontal or sagittal plane, and sections were collected and rinsed in cold PB.

[PMC4123791 full text, Results - Pattern of Pax7 expression - Forebrain]
Regarding the presence of Pax7 cells in the rostral prosencephalon, only a conspicuous labeling was identified in the paraphysis, mainly in anamniotes, in relation to the choroid plexus that extended between the telencephalic hemispheres. In addition, a few Pax7 cells were located in the caudobasal hypothalamus within the mammillary region, in close relation to the diencephalic cell population in p3 (see below). Of note, conspicuous Pax7 cells formed a dense population in the intermediate lobe of the hypophysis ().
