[PubMed abstract, PMID 26236556]
Since the use of computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, colloid cysts (CCs) are discovered more frequently and subsequently their true incidence exceeds the numbers previously estimated. In 1986, the first familial case was reported in two identical twin brothers. To date, a total of 17 of these cases have been reported, all differing in the pattern of affected family members. Here, we describe a unique presentation of a familial case and review the relevant literature on CCs and their natural history to improve our understanding of these cases. Familial CC can present in various patterns, sizes, and forms. A genetic factor is likely to be responsible in these cases, and further research is warranted to clarify this phenomenon.

[PMC4521314 full text, Discussion - The origin of colloid cysts]
Ever since their discovery, CC's have remained a curious clinicopathological entity. More than a century ago Sjovall presumed the cysts originated out of the paraphysis cerebri, an evanescent vestigial embryonic structure.[] This theory held state until the advent of the term “neuroepithelial cyst” in 1929 by Fulton and Bailey. They discussed the presence of cilia and certain cyst contents in their specimens along with the variability in the location of the cysts, holding both a pathological and an anatomical argument against a paraphyseal origin. In 1955 Kappers partially restored Sjovall's theory by explaining that an ectopic location of the cyst results from inclusion of peripheral paraphyseal “anlagen,” which is of ependymal origin and may arise along variable locations along the ventricular axis.[] Electron microscopy allowed Coxe and Luse to subscribe an ependymal epithelial origin in 1964 though their findings were based on a single case.[] One year later Shuangshotiintroduced their theory of neuroepithelial origin.[] Based on a review of the literature combined with embryological and comparative anatomical studies, they classified the paraphysis as the extraventricular choroid plexus. The suggestion that both choroid plexus and ependyma are derived from a common neuroepithelium can balance the arguments Fulton and Bailey held against the paraphyseal origin, somewhat unifying the former theories. Besides this, some authors have proposed an extraneural origin, namely out of the ectopic endodermal tissue. The argument for this theory is the similarity of the cyst epithelium to the respiratory mucosa, described by Tsuchida[] Concurrently Ho and Garcia found the presence of ciliated cells and goblet cells upon ultrastructural analysis of their specimens. In their arrangement, the cells were interconnected by desmosomes and met the criteria of an endodermal lineage.[] These findings have led to the supposition that CC's and Rathke's cleft cysts may share the same pathophysiology and represent comparable lesions at different locations.[] Still the true origin of the CC's remains a matter of debate.
