[ABSTRACT, PubMed PMID 31045394]
Anuran amphibians are common model organisms in bioacoustics and neurobiology. To date, however, most available methods for studying auditory processing in frogs are highly invasive and thus do not allow for longitudinal study designs, nor do they provide a global view of the brain, which substantially limits the questions that can be addressed. The goal of this study was to identify areas in the frog brain that are responsible for auditory processing using in vivo manganese-enhanced MRI (MEMRI). We were interested in determining if the neural processing of socially relevant acoustic stimuli (e.g., species-specific calls) engages a specific pattern of brain activation that differs from patterns elicited by less- or nonrelevant acoustic signals. We thus designed an experiment, in which we presented three different types of acoustic stimuli (species-specific calls, band-limited noise, or silence) to fully awake northern leopard frogs () and then conducted MEMRI T1-weighted imaging to investigate differences in signal intensity due to manganese uptake as an indication of brain activity across all three conditions. We found the greatest change in signal intensity within the torus semicircularis (the principal central auditory region), the habenula, and the paraphysis of frogs that had been exposed to conspecific calls compared with noise or silence conditions. Stimulation with noise did not result in the same activation patterns, indicating that signals with contrasting social relevance are differentially processed in these areas of the amphibian brain. MEMRI provides a powerful approach to studying brain activity with high spatial resolution in frogs.

[PMC FULL TEXT, Materials and Methods, Animals]
In the present study, we used eight (six females, two males) Northern leopard frogs (), with body weights of 52.4–93.9 g (mean ± sd = 75.3 ± 14.3 g).

[PMC FULL TEXT, Materials and Methods, Image processing and analysis (last paragraph)]
In order to make a secondary, univariate comparison of distinct regions of interest (ROIs) revealed by the whole-brain analysis, we calculated average signal intensities of clusters identified from the whole brain analysis. Manual brain extraction and segmentation of certain regions-of-interest as identified by the whole-brain analysis, for example the torus semicircularis (TS), habenula (HB), and paraphysis (PP) were performed using the software ITK-Snap (),
following the detailed brain atlas for().

[PMC FULL TEXT, Results, paragraphs 2-3]
Compared to signal enhancement without explicit sound stimulation, we found significantly stronger signal enhancement in the TS, HB, and the PP, in frogs that received socially-relevant calls compared to frogs that were exposed to silence (&).
Pairwise post-hoc comparisons corroborated significant signal intensity enhancement in frogs that received the socially relevant call compared to silence across all three ROIs (n= n= 8, TS:= 0.006, HB:= 0.04, PP:= 0.006), while no statistically significant difference was found between “call” and “noise” (all>0.3). The comparison between “noise” and “silence” revealed significant differences in signal intensity only in the TS (= 0.02) and the HB (= 0.04), but not the PP (= 0.1).

[PMC FULL TEXT, Discussion]
We also found that the HB as well as the PP showed significant signal enhancement after auditory stimulation with the calls compared to silence.

Our experiments also revealed a significant increase in signal intensity after stimulation with socially relevant calls compared to silence in the PP of frogs. The PP is a glandular structure found in the third ventricle of lower vertebrates and is well developed in amphibians and reptiles. The function of the gland is not well understood, but it may play a vital role in calcium metabolism (). Given that paramagnetic manganese was used as a calcium analogue in this study, the significant increase in signal intensity in the PP after stimulation with conspecific calls could possibly be due to an overall increase in blood pressure, and thereby increased Mntransport into the PP, caused by a generalized increase in arousal in treatments with call stimulation – which would also be in line with the elevated signal found in the HB. Although eventual differences in the permeability of the blood-brain-barrier (BBB) close to the PP could have led to an accumulation of Mnin this area, our experiment only detected increased signal enhancement in the PP in conditions with explicit sound stimulation. Therefore, we can exclude a sole methodological or anatomical explanation for the increased signal in the PP. Further studies are needed to investigate specific features of the BBB in the anuran brain.

Interestingly, significant signal enhancements in TS, HB, and PP were only observed when comparing frogs exposed to “call” versus “silence”. Stimulation with noise did not result in statistically significant signal enhancement in the voxel-based whole-brain analysis, compared to call or silence conditions ().
