[ABSTRACT, PubMed PMID 37636536]
Colloid cysts are benign intracranial lesions, typically located in the anterior portion of the third ventricle near the interventricular foramina of Monro. The cysts usually consist of an epithelial lining filled with viscous gelatinous material of various components. Colloid cysts are generally asymptomatic, but once symptomatic, they can present in a variety of ways, including headaches, vomiting, visual and memory problems, and vertigo. Colloid cysts present classically on imaging as a well-delineated hyperattenuating lesion on unenhanced radiological modalities. Herein, we report a case of a patient who presented with hydrocephalus caused by a sizeable colloid cyst which demonstrated atypical imaging findings in the form of hypodensity on CT and hyperintensity on T2WI, making them difficult to identify and easy to miss. Although this atypical imaging appearance is uncommon with yet unknown true incidence, it is prudent to be aware of it because early management of colloid cysts has a favorable outcome, in contrast to untreated cysts that are associated with higher rates of morbidity and mortality. Additionally, we provide a comprehensive, evidence-based review of the medical entity of intracranial colloid cysts with highlights of current postulated pathological theories and management algorithms.

[PMC FULL TEXT, section "Case discussion", first paragraph (the only paragraph of the full text that mentions the paraphysis; citation numbers are stripped in the text version read)]
Thus far, neuropathologists still debate the true origin of colloid cysts. Colloid cysts were thought to originate from the neuroectodermal elements of the paraphysis cerebri [,]. However, recent immunohistochemistry studies have challenged the notion of the neuroepithelial origin of colloid cysts by the presence of several different cell types lining the cyst capsule, including ciliated and nonciliated, goblet, basal, and squamous cells, suggesting an endodermal rather than ectodermal origin of these colloid cysts. Therefore, migration of endodermal elements during early brain development with either slow or delayed growth in the roof of the third ventricle has been favored as a critical factor in the etiology of colloid cysts.

[PMC FULL TEXT, section "Case presentation", histology sentence]
Histology revealed fragments of a cyst lined by ciliated pseudostratified epithelium with mild capsular hyalinization and mucoid material of different textures and colors (). A final diagnosis was made of a colloid cyst of the third ventricle with no evidence of malignancy.
